Starts with more abstract thoughts about the nature of the mediums of communication. Replaces 'medium is the message' with 'medium with metaphor', which implies even bigger role of a medium in forming the way we percieve the world. The dominant medium of a culture defines the epistemology of this culture, the way the people of this culture think, derive truths, and the things they value.

Then he describes the previously dominant medium, the printed word, and its effects. Anything expressed with a word, especially with a long linear sequences of words, builds around ideas, logical coherence. The culture built around printed word values a rounded understanding of the phenomena, and is prepared to spend a lot of time in pursuit of this understanding. As illustrated by the Lincoln-Douglas debates, where public was eager to pay attention to multiple hours of nuanced arguments.

The technology that first started the killing of that paradigm was telegraph. It provided the momentaneous connection between geographically distant areas. The result of it wasn't as much the transmission of important information at the moment it was needed, but much more so the communication itself, even when there was nothing of substance to say. The new electric communication lines were inundated with trivialities. 
He illustrates the devastating effect of the telegraph with the example of the local newspapers: before they reported news that was local and of relevance to the people who buy the newspaper, something that might have affect on their lives. But when information can easily come from other parts of the world, the newspapers started to prioritize global events, curiosites, gossip, etc. I.e. the information that wasn't vitally important to their readers, that was there mostly to entartain them.
The second technology that ushered us into a new kind of culture was photography, a non-verbal medium that requires a different kind of epistemology. It attracts more immediate attention, and when accompanied with some text, renders this text somehow more meaningful, even if it's not. Thus, images helped legitimize trivial information as the main content of the media.
All this useless inforamation consumed by the readers needed some form of appliance, that's when all the crosswords and quizes start to come out. The goal of entertainment is more entertainment.	

TV came and embodied those principle absolutely. It's an immediate delivery of 24 images per second. And entertainment dictates all the discourse on TV. If you are not entertaining, you can't be on TV. This doesn't allow for exposition of ideas, you can't transmit an act of thinking on TV, it would be dead air. TV turns everything, even the most important cultural events (e.g. presidential debates) into show business.

Incoherence of the TV product is its main feature. The news consist of a rapidfire of events that are not connected to each other and not connected to anything the viewer was exposed prior. The TV news can be considered as desinformation, maybe not in the intent but in the result it produces on its consumer, i.e. leaving the consumer in a confused state, farther from the truth or understanding.
