To meet death, Nachiketa goes deep in the meditation. To earn the meeting, he has to be in deep meditation for three days strait. The kind of resolution one has to have to learn the truths.
The final test the Death gives him before accepting him as a deciple, is the temptations of earthly benefits and pleasures: wealth, power, lust. When Yama tempts Nachiketa with last, he shows him a harem of beautiful girls, and points that they will never grow old, among other things. Nachiketa knows though that all those pleasures are transient, the only thing he wants is the truth about human condition and how to transcend it.

What differs humans from animals is our ability to make choices. Everyday we choose between two abstract alternatives: preya and shreya. Preya is the pleasure principle: if we choose it, we follow our urge for immediate gratification, which at the end distracts us from our true path, and brings regrets right after the cheap gratification. Shreya is what is beneficial, especially in a long term; it can be pleasureable as well, but more commonly it doesn't provide the here and now reward. An untrained and distracted mind will choose preya every time: it's more flushy, and when the moment of choice comes, we choose is almost as an instinct. The best way to choose shreya is not to choose preya, recognize the cravings for pleasure and let them go.
The metaphor of the chariot goes here as well. The chariot itself is the body, the horses are the senses, the driver is the intellect, the mind is the reigns with which the intellect controls horses/senses, and the self is the passenger in the chariot. The point of interest for us is how the horses are controlled. The horses will go after the Preya each and every time if the driver is asleep or simply doesn't know how to reign the horses in. From here comes the problem of freedom within one's life: if the horses are free to go whereever they want, the person himself is the slave to the horses, and will live his life never arriving to the destination he dreams of. We, in our mind, intellectually, can decide that the best destination for us should be Petushki, we might even set the horses afoot. Throughout the route though, the horses will see a bottle of vodka and desire it, they don't have a notion of destination themselves, so they will steer away in the direction of immediate pleasure, and the person will never see Petushki. People from the outside might say that he has a drinking problem, but in reality he has a horse problem. Our job, if we want to give ourselves a chance, is to get the horses under control of the mind.

The human body is like a medieval city with skin as walls for protection and 11 entrances (ears, eyes, mouth, nostrills,genitalia, anus, navel, top of the skull that opens up once - when an enlightened one decides to die) as gates, though which we interface with the outer world. In the center of the city, rising above everything else, there is a palace, where the king lives. The king is our mind, when he lives in the palace and executes his power of what enters through the gates (i.e. sense impressions), he is secure. When the king is enfatuated with pleasures, he lets in the trojan horses that provide him the pleasures; he abandons the palace to go and make sure everything is getting in. The good king lets something in only after a thorough inspection and validation on the matter of quality.
He also evokes the concept of prana, which is the inner fire, the life energy. When we consume, we always give away the prana. And when we consume indiscriminantly, we waste all the prana on things that don't worth it, and it leaves us without energy to do anything else.
The city metaphor also works in terms of chasing something outside of ourselves. When we do that we leave our city in trying to grasp a fleeting feeling. In pursuing such ghosts we go father and father from the city until we are completely lost and exposed to the elements.

The modern problem is the identification with the body and not the mind. The body is subject to change, it weathers away. So when we think we are the body and nothing else, we are vain when we are young and look good, and we freak out at the sight of changes to the body that come with age. We become insecure and restless.

The term samskara refers to more or less the same concept as the modern understanding of neural circuits that were formed by historical impressions of actions and thoughts on our minds. They provide conditioned responses, including the habits of thinking. Each samskara starts as a small and weak one, it grows through repetition, and when it becomes that big, it can take over the mind without the mind realising this. They work as circuits as well: we make them stronger by acting according to them, each act grows the particular samskara.
Interestingly, this term also can mean a rite of passage, where a person through an ordeal purifies himself of old impressions, so they don't shape his behaviour and thoughts on the new stage of his life.

When talking about desire, he presents it as a river of prana flowing through the channels prepared by samskaras. The topology of channels in one's landscape are unique to every human, though everyone has a limited amount of prana. So,someone with a lot of desires, will have prana trickle all over the place in small brooks, having little effect on the landscape. A more concentrated person, with an obsessive desire will direct almost all his prana into one stream, sometimes sacrificing everything else.
As a concept, desire is neither good nor bad. But desires can have different directions. The selfish desires is the source of all suffering. During a spiritual transformation, our goal is to transform selfish desires into selfless ones. The tool of this transformation is will. Desire and will are related. As he presents it, the will is in competition with desires for prana (but at the same time desire begets will?). The upanishads say:

"You are what your deep, driving desire is.
As your deep, driving desire is, so is your will.
As your will is, so is your deed.
As your deed is, so is your destiniy."

So I guess, the right interpretation is: when we start on the journey of spiritual transformation, the will created by selfless desires is still weak and it is difficult for it to compete with selfish urges. The good news is each time we choose the selfless will over a selfish desire, the will grows in power. And the will can be controlled consciously, not like desire. So, the prerequisite of any spiritual transformation is constant vigilence, choosing the right path for the prana to flow.
As we keep making the right choices, and the will grows, soon enought we train it to be indomitable; and this is the core charcteristic of a powerful person, and of a free person. His will is not shaken by the circumstances the life throws at him, he simply keeps making the right choices.  
What differs humans from animals is our ability to make choices. Everyday we choose between two abstract alternatives: preya and shreya. Preya is the pleasure principle: if we choose it, we follow our urge for immediate gratification, which at the end distracts us from our true path, and brings regrets right after the cheap gratification. Shreya is what is beneficial, especially in a long term; it can be pleasureable as well, but more commonly it doesn't provide the here and now reward. An untrained and distracted mind will choose preya every time: it's more flushy, and when the moment of choice comes, we choose is almost as an instinct. The best way to choose shreya is not to choose preya, recognize the cravings for pleasure and let them go.

What differs humans from animals is our ability to make choices. Everyday we choose between two abstract alternatives: preya and shreya. Preya is the pleasure principle: if we choose it, we follow our urge for immediate gratification, which at the end distracts us from our true path, and brings regrets right after the cheap gratification. Shreya is what is beneficial, especially in a long term; it can be pleasureable as well, but more commonly it doesn't provide the here and now reward. An untrained and distracted mind will choose preya every time: it's more flushy, and when the moment of choice comes, we choose is almost as an instinct. The best way to choose shreya is not to choose preya, recognize the cravings for pleasure and let them go.

In the yoga tradition the mind is like a surface of a pond, called 'chitta', and the thoughts are like ripples on the surface. Importantly every ripple has its ascension and then fall, corresponding to the exitement in the mind and then coming down.

The thought process can seem continuous to the ones who can't slow it down. When we slow it down with meditation, we can see that there are gaps in between, and one thought doesn't necessarily have connection to the other, they appear rather spontaneously, though a thought arises as a response to a stimulus. Thus, we can say that the thought is defined by the stimulus. And every though carves a channel for its samskara, a conditioned habit.
Going further, we examine the concept of karma and find out that the source of every karma is a thought, since all the things we do and say, and the way we do it, comes from the way we think, on what samskaras we operate. So, as long as our thoughts are defined by stimuli, i.e. external disturbances, circumstances, we are slaves to our environment. Our state, our karma, our destiny are not up to us, but up to a person that happens to irritate us, up to a compulsive desire for a pleasure, triggered by some environmental cue, etc.
The path to spiritual independence lies through cutting the connection between the stimulus and the thought, to still the mind. There are two traditional ways to do it, that work together: meditation stills the mind, mantras, pronounced daily and throughout the day, remind us not to react, to maintain the independence of thought. As we learn to remove stimuli from our inner space, we can sustain thoughts that are directed, triggered by the inner will, and which are beneficial. In between the directed mental activity, we can rest and let the mind be just a calm surface.

The fatness of the ego is proportional to the rigidness of its opinions. This mental space carved by samskaras, the mind, is not our true self, it's something called 'jiva', or shadow in this book. It's ever-changing, unstable, mask. The 'purusha', is the real self, that quietely sits beyond the mask and observes. Jiva feeds on self desires, on pleasures. To get it slim, so it doesn't block the purusha, we have to renounce the self-desires. Jiva is a taster, it tastes the stimuli and they fatten it, Purusha is the enjoyer: the more we reveal our true self, the better joy we experience.

Also, a beautiful verse from William Blake:

He who binds to himself a joy
Doth the winged life destroy.
But he who kisses the joy as it flies
Lives in eternity's sunrise.

In our relations with other people we seldom know them, and those relationships are actually with our impressions of them. To change how we relate to someone, we need to change the impression of them in our mind, i.e. the way we think about them. Similarly, we have an impression of ourselves, the jiva, the mask. When we learn to identify ourselves with purusha, we are free to change the way we think about the mask, to put on the mask we choose. This is the way out from the monotonous and automatic life, where everything is the same patterned response.
