-------------------------------------------------
INITIATION MYSTERIES IN PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS
-------------------------------------------------


PRELIMINARY REMARKS


The meaning of the rites is always religious, because it seeks change in the existential status, which can be realized only through religious experience. Crucial revelations (enlightment) about world and life, interiorized, is what makes someone a new man.
So, our goal here is to understand initiation rites as a religious experience, looking to arrive at the existential situation (mind state) of a religious man from different cultures and ages that he assumes in the experience of initiation; and define common principles across different cultures.

We can devide all the initiation rites into three categories:

~> Puberty rites - their function is to effect the transition from childhood or adolescence to adulthood. Obligatory to all members of a particular society. Centers around a revelation of the sacred, which is the term larger than religion, includes also mythical and cultural traditions, sexuality. Thus the novice is introduced to this broader religious life that makes him integrated into the culture and allows him to function as its integral part. It is the transfer from the mode of a child, which is a natural one, to the cultural mode; a person gains access to the cultural mode by accepting a set of spiritual values as his new personal value structure, thus what he is is transformed. Those who is yet to experience this transformation are considered devoid of the status of a human being; they don't fully share the human condition precisely because the lack that sacred part, the religious life. It is the fundamental existential experience for the candidate and for the society as large (through re-actualization of its traditional values it regenerates itself).

The two other categories share some features: not obligatory for all members of the community, performed individually (unlike pubrety rites that happen in group of novices), and the element of ecstasy.

~> Rites to enter a secret society - usually those societies are limited to one sex and are extremely protective of their secrets. Most are male. Mixing of sexes is rare (exeption - Greco-Oriental mysteries in Mediterranean and Near East).

~> Initiation into a mystical vocation (in traditional cultures - the vocation of the medicine man or the shaman). Personal experience assumes importance in this type. A novice is destined to assume a new role of elevated religious experience: voluntary or not (it might be forced by superhuman beings into that vocation).



THE SACRED GROUND


We start with an example of Australian aborigines. The preparation for the ritual starts months in advance and includes multiple tribes. First a saced ground where the ritual will take place is prepared, the the novices are separated from their mothers and taken to a special place where they are instructed with the tribe's mythology and traditions, and start to experience some ordeals: dietary restrictions, cuttings, pulling of the hair, etc.
The sacred ground consists of two circles: one big where the rite starts and there is an ornated pole in the center, then where's a path to a smaller circle, adorned with inscriptions and figurines, the cultural meaning of which the initiates will know only during the next rite. In the second circle where are two trees plated upside-down and two elders reciting tribal myths.
The sacred ground symbolizes the primordial sacred place where the divinity of the tribe first created history and taught its people how to behave in this newly created world. Thus the initiation rite is a recital of the creation of the world. By going back to the mythical times and recreating the creation, the tribe regenerates its own history and cultural values.



SEPARATION FROM THE MOTHER


The boys are separated from their mothers in a dramatic and ritual fashion: masked and often unknown men stand in between novices and their mothers, and take them away to a secret enclosure. The act of separation symbolizes the end of childhood where children are unconscious, irresponsible, happy, asexual - that is a profane spiritual space. Both novices and their mothers are told that the initiats are carried away to be killed by the divinities.
In the secret enclosure the boys are exposed to ordeals by darkness, fire, and other challenges. Thus happens the ritual death, and the introduction of the mortality in general. In the proceeding ceremonies they are resuscitated by the same divine beings into a new status of adults, introduced into the sacred spiritual space where they can perform their responsabilities of maintaining the culture.
As new men, when returning to their mothers, they are often mourned as a deceased would be mourned.



COMMON TRAITS FROM OTHER RITES OF ABORIGINES


The instructions following the ritual death concern secret (to women and children) information about gods and the cultural norms with which they civilized the tribe. Those instruction are presented in a dramatic fashion: with dances, songs, etc. The medicine man performs a journey to the god's realm and back (buried alive and resurrected), from where he acquires some magical substance to annoit the novices.

After the instructions, the new men can be shown to the mothers, who treat them as strangers and chase them away, then they go to the bushes / forest to live there for several months, practicing the new norms. These months of practice also include dietary restrictions, and other taboos: like not going back to the main camp, not looking at women, and not going to bed until some late point at night.

We accentuate the role of a divine being in the death and rivival of the initiate. God takes his life away by eating or burning him, but God is also the one that gives him a new life, sexuality, and fertility. By the process of being killed and revived by the divinity, the initiate establishes a connection with the divine, he walks the line that connects the earth and the sky, and now he is a true son of God. 
