news is toxic to the body: stories about crisis events are designed to interact with your limbic system and increase your cortisol level, which puts you in an exciting flight of fight mode; high cortisol levels weaken the immune system and throttle production of growth hormones; the body is in the state of chronic stress - impaired digestion, nervousness, susceptibility to infections. 


news is irrelevant: none of what the news broadcasts is important to your life or helps you to take better decisions; the news concentrates on what is new, not on what is relevant, because we can identify what is new easily, but struggle to identify relevant information; and what is new is a sensless stream of information that floods your bandwidth and puts you in a cognitive disadvantage; the less news you consume, the better your chance to recognize the important things that will affect your life.


news is outside your circle of competence: to have a professional success in the modern world, we have to be highly-specialized in a narrow field, we don't have enough resources to master broad range of disciplines; so it's crucial to focus your attention on the data available inside your area of competence, and filter out any information that carries you away from that area. any news or info you consume in the media is way outside your circle of competence, it keeps you away from mastering your thing. no really competent individuals who mastered their field of work are news junkies.


news gets risk assessment all wrong: news delivers flashy stories, which are dramatic and often personal - all to better capture our attention. the bad things that happen in those stories are not likely to happen to us, so they make us worry about risks that we most certainly will not encounter in our lifes; so our risk anticipation mechanism is misaligned, we are likely to miss the real danger that comes our way, because we trained by the news to anticipate the wrong risks.


news limits understanding: news provides us with a collection of facts which are random consequences of deeper processes that really shape the world; news tells us nothing about those processes, concentrating on the random occurences. they provide no connections between the facts. they ignore the underlying movements because they're complex and non-linear, the stories about them are costly to produce and are not appealing to a simple mind. as our brain accumulate those worthless facts, they become incapable to grasp the complexity of life. hording of information is the opposite of understanding.


news inhibits thought: thinking requires prolonged time of concentration, news disrupt this concentration with its short and cheap little stories, it trains your mind to be shallow and not spend substential time trying to understand something. rigorous thinking with the goal of understanding will include the passage of abstract information from short-term memory into long-term memory; this passage is a bottleneck, it's narrow and hard to bridge, our only hope to it is a sustained concentration on the topic; the news flood this channel with junk and keep it blocked so nothing of value really crosses the passage, and a news junkie is left clueless.


news rewires our brains: neuron connections build themselves up in the image of our behaviour; when we read news instead of reading deeply, our brains start to prioritize skimming on the surface and multitasking by building circuits that are responsible for that; this happens at the expense of the circuits wired to process long and complex information; as we consume the media, our brains physically become dumber, and we loose the capacity to read for long hours and maintain clear thoughts (those use same circuits). those affects on the structure of the brain are lasting, reading news affects your mental state even when you are not reading them, making you supurflous and distracted in your everyday tasks.


news is a waste of time: it wastes your time while you are reading it + it wastes the time required for the context switching: as you stop reading the news and finally pay attention to the task at hand, it will take substantial time to put your mind back into the working state + it wastes time when you are away from the media, but the stories it imprinted onto your mind keep popping up and distract your attention over and over again. time is your most valuable resource and you throw away a terrifying amount of it for a junk that does nothing but hurt you.


news is produced by journalists: to produce a worthy investigation that shines a light on how the world funcitons takes time, effort, and competence only few journalists possess, the rest are captured in this industry of junk, they are not outstanding at all, and they don't face any consequences for a false story, because it will be buried in the cemetary of old news anyway and no one will care. so they are not even incentivised to produce a quality product, it's all junk produced by incompetent hacks.


news produces fake fame: a functioning society depens on the effective cooperation, the person's reputation is the representation of how effective collaborator he is: a competent and virtuous person in a traditional society acquires good reputation, and others know that he is a good partner in cooperation. media subverts this mechanism of discerning high-value individuals with the notion of fame; it eleveates people who are neither competent no posses power to the status of a celebrity, on basis of how many eyeballs this person can attract; and for that a celebrity doesn't need to be competent of virtuous in any way; people will enjoy watching utter idiots making fools of themselves and cheer them for it. thus the media creates false idols out of mediocrities and makes people look up to them, generating more mediocrity.


news is manipulative: news is produced by entities that have agenda in where to direct the attention of their customers; when they choose the facts to report out of plethora of other facts, they are guided by the agenda, and if they need to conjure up a fake story to promote their agenda they will do it, and the news consumers will have no way of verifying this information, they will eat it up and let it affect their thoughts. so the media injects lies into our souls.


news makes us passive: in a traditional society, every bit of information about things happening around the tribe was relevant and something we could affect by performing some action. now the media bombards us with most distressing events from around the globe that we can do nothing about; this information only stresses us out without any promise of possibility to change things with our actions. this all results in a learned helplessness, we become accostomed to accept problems as something that happens and outside of our control.
