-------------------------------------------------------------------------
CREATING CHANGE - IN SYSTEMS AND IN OUR PHILOSOPHY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------


VI. LEVERAGE POINTS - PLACES TO INTERVENE IN A SYSTEM

leverage points in complex systems are counterintuitive, and even when found, the direction of application is counterintuitive as well.
the author offers a generalized list of possible areas of interventions.

	> numbers - constants and variables
	  changing the amount of same stuff the flows through the system, w/o changing it's nature of the paths it flows through
	  results in a substantial change only if the amounts are so extereme that they trigger the system to rearrange itself
	  
	> buffers 
	  systems with larger stocks, comparative to the intensity of their flows, are more stable than system with small stocks and intense flows
	  so to stabilize a system, you can create a buffer, which is an artificial augment of a stock, or a new stock, that will keep the flows
	  from ravaging the system. (e.g. keeping your money in a bank is creating a buffer btn income and spending). this is costly though and 
	  oftentimes plain imposible within the constraints of the system. so not effective.
	  
	> stock-and-flow structures
	  physical infrastructure of a system. rebuilding it is an ineffective method. which underlines the importance of proper preemptive design.
	  
	> delays
	  a powerful tool when you can actually change it, in most cases, the time of a delay is a given. wehn it's not, be careful with the 
	  direction in which you apply the adjustment
	  
those were the leverage points related to the physical parts of the system, there are more rigid and don't provide that much of a power over the system's behavior. that power can be found in the information and control parts of the system:
	  
	> balancing feedback loops
	  they keep stocks within safe bounds. consist of elements: goals (certain stock state), a mechanism that monitors the current state and 
	  signals the deviation from the desired state, and a response mechanism.
	  so the leverage points are found in the connections btn those elements
	  a complex system will have multiple balancing loops controling various aspects of the system, they can be dormant, while the stock they
	  monitor is within the safe bounds, and may appear an unnecessary overload.
	  
	> reinforcing feedback loops
	  they are the source of growth, explosion, erosion, and collapse of system. a system with a reinforcing loop out of control will destroy
	  itself; thus, the main leverage point here is to slow down the loop
	  
	> information flows
	  is a form of feedback loop that provides information about the state of the system and thus can influence the decisions. big factor here
	  is where you channel this information flow to (to what part of the system)
	  
	> rules
	  define the game. the rules for international trade are written by corporations and don't include any balancing feedback loops or 
	  information flows from other sectors of the world, that's why their reinforcing loop of ever-growing profits is bound to destroy the 
	  system
	  
	> self-organization
	  the ability of the system to crete new structures and behaviours, for example how the evolution creates new life forms based on the
	  environmental challenges. self-organization depends on the pool building blocks with which to create new structures. so the leverage point
	  here is to deversify: the more diverse system is the more resilient it is
	  
	> goals
	  superior to self-organization, because the same process can generate different results (states) depending of its direction (goal). usually
	  changing actors in the system is a low-level intervention, but if the actor is at the top of the system and has the power to change the 
	  goal of the system, it'a a game changer (Ronald Raegan as an example).
	  
	> paradigms
	  sets of axioms, unstated beliefs that seem obvious to the actors. paradigm is the source of the structure of system: its stocks, flows,
	  loops, and goals. a change in paradigm radically changes the system. the best way to change a paradigm is to build a model of the system
	  and to see it from outside
	  
	> transcending paradigm
	  understanding that any system is a simplification of reality and a ghost of imagination, so we're free to choose whatever paradigm that 
	  suits our purpose. there is no point in holding a belief that makes you miserable and doesn't advance you on your path.
	  
	  
VII. LIVING IN THE WORLD OF SYSTEMS

you can't really predict or control the complex systems. what you can do is to design them and, so to speak, dance with them. in this last chapter Donella tells how to dance with systems.

	get the beat of the system: observe its behaviour, shine awat from your own or others' theories about how the system functions and stick
	to the facts. theories are full of misconceptions and of wishful thinking.
	
	expose your mental model to the light of day. i.e. represent it visually, or verbally. it helps to gain a different perspecitve and
	redesign the thing more efficently. teaches you to be flexible with your ideas.
	
	honor and distribute information. malfunction of a system can be caused by missing information, information being late or inaccurate
	
	use language with care and enrich it with system concepts. the information flows are composed of language, to keep those streams clean we
	need to keep our words concrete, meaningful, and truthful. moreover as the system gains in complexity, the language must reflect it by
	by enlarging the vocabularly.
	
	pay attention to what is important, not just what is quantifiable. system that values quanitity, and sets its goals for quanitity will 
	produce quanitity and not necessarily quality. but some variable cannot be represented by numbers, which doesn't mean they should be
	excluded from the system.
	
	make feedback policies for feedback systems. to govern dynamic systems you need a dynamic policy that has a learning process incorporated
	in it (i.e. policy changes based on changes in the state of the system)
	
	go for the good of the whole. don't maximize attention to one part of the system, care for the whole organism.
	
	listen to the wisdom of the system. a healthy system runs itself, most of the self-organizing mechanisms are to be found at the bottom 
	levels of they hierarchy. don't interrupt the natural flows of the sytem you want to improve without understanding what keeps it afloat.
	
	locate responsibility in the system. sometimes outside events that trigger events in the system is possible to control, sometimes they're not.
	in that case the intrinsic responsibility can be increased, meaning the feedback for the consequences of events get directed straight to the
	desicions makers within the system, it improves connectivity and makes the management more effective.
	
	stay humble - stay a learner. your mental models are always incomplete, when you encounter surprises and failures the correct response is to
	learn, which requires admitting of your shortcomings. in a complex system going straint and stay the course is not a smart strategy, rather
	adjust based on your errors. embrace the uncertainty.
	
	expand time horizons. in systems there is not long-term or short-term: phenomena at different time scale are nested within each other, at any
	momeny we experience the effect of the things that happened yesterday and the things that happened decades of centuries ago.
	
	expand the boundary of caring. in the world of complex system everything is interconnected, so the failure of one part will negatively affect
	another, and the success one part will elevate another.
	
	modern culture is in the trap of 'drift to low performance' when it comes to moral values: the media zooms in on evel deeds as more shoking
	ones, so we tend te expect evil. this is a typical mechanism of the drift where negative events get magnified. and the way out of that is 
	to feed on the positive and maintain the goals and ideals uncorrupted
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
