some periods of time require an expansion of reason (or tools of understanding) to deal with new experiences. e.g. when Columbus discovered the New World, people had to abondon the medeaval reasoning. they could stick to old ways, but the evidence was undeniable, an the old ways stood no chance, since they didn't correspond with the new reality. or when Newton didn't have tools to deal with the changes that seems to take no time to occur, he had to invent a new tool to descibe them, the calculus.
the author thinks that he lives during one of those times. the rationality fulfilled its purpose, provided us with shelters and food, and now people, since they don't need it for survival, started to look it at it and notice its ugliness; and wonder, is there any other ways to survive without submitting yourself to this ugliness. hence the infatuation with occult ideaologies, mind expanding drugs etc. the change in the experience is so profound, that a simple expansion of the classic rationality will not be enouent LIE About The Unemployment Rate?
Valuetainment
189K views 9 hours agogh, we have to go beyond rationality.
to free ourselves from the classic reasoning we'll have to go back to the time it was invented - to the ancient greece. ever since, we've been using the greek tools without understanding what brought those tools to life, the greeks themselves were using different tools. the author thinks the key are the rhetoricians (Phedrus was one of them), who were the first teachers in the Western world, but were ridiculed by Plato, who was rooting for his version of rationality, and forgotten eventually, everything we know about them is from Plato, their enemy. but maybe they can give us an example of different kind of raionality, more suitable for modern times, the one that can synthesize the romantic and classical worldviews.
this line of thought springs directly from the work on quality that Phedrus was doing in Bozeman.

he taught rhetorics, and this subject frustrated his analytical mind, because the subject itself was the least analytical field in the church of reason. everything analytical you could say about it (how some sentences can produce certain effect in a reader eg.), was an afterthought, an artificial superimposition on something that is purely intuitive. non of the writers he was teaching as examples of good writing, wrote according to some established rules, they just knew something was good.
and there he found the point where you can apply analysis to - what's good and what's bad? how can we know that something has quality and sth doesn't? we can't describe it, yet we know it exists.

he starts to eleborate on quality at the beginning of the Part III when he and Chris start their hike in the mountains. mountains is a common scene in zen literature, and in religions in general, as a metaphor for a spiritual ascension. in front of every person there is mountain, the majority never dares to start carving their path towards the top of it, because it's a heavy task, full of hardships. the ones who do, never go along the same paths others do: there are as many paths as there are people. some who reach the top tend to pass the knowledge down to other people, those are spiritual leaders like Jesus or Moses. though those paths can become outdated when perceived in the context of a diferent time.
Phedrus saw quality as his way through the mountain. his study of it can be separated into two phases: during the first one he didn't attempt to make rigid statements about what it is, he just taught rhetorics, applying quality as a working concept. during the second phase he approached it systematically, built an enormous hierarchical structure of thought to support his definitions, and as a result of it he thought he archieved an explanation of existence and our consiousness of it better than anyone else before him; and eventually lost his mind in the eyes of the society.

as he taught rethorics, writing, he was amazed by how little students had to say. to defeat this problem he started to give them more and more specific subjects, down to writing about a coin. and that worked. the problem was that the students were conditioned to imitate what they've been told to get a good grade; and when they were given a task to write about a broad subject, they were scanning for a ready-made info to repeat, didn't find anything, and were blocked from saying anything. narrowing down the subject helped free up creative thinking: when you write about a coin that lies in front of you, there is no crutches of established information.
so the students from young age were programmed to imitate to get good marks, the whole purpose of education is subverted, where marks become the main goal, and the knowledge that they are supposed to represent, looses its central place. Phedrus experimented with dropping marks during one semester, and even wrote a paper about a hypothetical student, conditioned for the marks, in a new mark-less system: how he fails initially, because his priorities weren't right, but in the absence of marks he wouldn't have any motivation to stay in the university and drag on the fruitless struggle, thus saving money, time, and effort. so he's forced to find a lower-status job, the monotonous nature of which teaches him the value of knowledge, and he returns to the university but this time it's different, this time he's goals are in the right place.
the current system thinks that the civilization is carried along the way by mules, trained to do specifically that. the true Church thinks that the civilization is carried by free men.
also, marks help to hide the failure to teach by instructors, they can half-ass through semester, at the end of which come up with some test and imitate the teaching process, put marks in the book and make believe that some learnt a lot while some didn't. but in fact everyone just wasted their time.

after the marks experiment, Phedrus demonstarted how quality is undefined, yet everyone can sense it, and thats the true goal of the studies: to attain he quality in one's work. and from that prospective even the dull rules from the learn book started to seem useful. he started to see the quality as the center, the key to understanding everything.
meanwhile Chris is struggling to climb the mountain, he gets tired and frustrated and angry, for him it's an ego thing. any effort that has self-gloriication as its goal will not end well, even if it ends with a victory, it's shallow, and won't be enjoyed, becuase ego will demand something else. ego doesn't enjoy here and now, it's always about something distant. and when this distant is achieved, it becomes here, and looses its appeal. so ego-climbing is more difficult and keeps you under pressure. selfless climbing is about the climbing itself, the holiness of the process and of that that surrounds you, it requires paying attention to and appreciation of what's in front of your face.

Phedrus always dispised the branch of philosophy dedicated to the analysis of what's beautiful - esthetics, the study of quality. he thought they're trying to cut into pieces the very thing they killed with their analysis. and by his refusal to define quality, he thought he rendered this whole branch obsolete. he used the same analytical method against itself when he reasoned that any attempt to define quality is fruitless, the reason is not equiped to do it.
this raised a question if the quality even exists, if it's impossible to define it? so he tried to imagine what the world would look like without quality, and the picture was bleak, it would be a dull world, void of values and purposes. the only thing that wouldn't be affected by the absence of quality were pure rationalistic endevors: mathematics, science, philosphy, and above all logic. that gave him an insight that quality is at the break of the hip and square worlds. it's a failure of an analytical mind to grasp what's beautiful, exactly becuase it tries to analyze it, while an artistic mind is capable of just digging it. and he thought if rationality stops trying to use it's usual tools on quality, it can understand it as well, and thus find a mutual point of understanding with the romantic world.










